---
title: Ventilation Monitoring as a Service
date: 2023-03-24T11:41:21+13:00
draft: true

categories:
  - Technology
  - Business
---


The importance of clean, fresh indoor air is one of the most tangible lessons we can learn from the Covid-19 pandemic. In addition to being an incredibly effective risk mitigation for reducing the spread of respiratory illnesses, clean, fresh air is also important to enable effective cognitive performance.

Monitoring indoor air quality is relatively easy to do, but traditionally has not been a key focus for many of us. I believe air quality monitoring should be accessible to everyone for any indoor space, and for highly occupied indoor spaces should be provided on a continuous basis. Last year, I started [co2mon.nz](https://co2mon.nz/) to enable that monitoring for our local primary school and the service continues to operate supporting the school, some local businesses and a few other individuals around NZ.

This post explores why I think there's a need and an opportunity to develop [co2mon.nz](https://co2mon.nz/) into a business that can accelerate the adoption of ventilation monitoring for small businesses and organisations in New Zealand. If I can successfully solve that opportunity then I will gain a nice SaaS business to add to my portfolio while also enabling better air quality for many indoor spaces, contributing to better health and improved productivity. Win, win!

Keep reading to walk through the following topics with me and understand in detail the opportunity I see and my approach to addressing it:

{{< toc >}}

Or, feel free to jump straight to the [next steps](#next-steps) if you want the short version. Either way, please share [co2mon.nz](https://co2mon.nz/) or this post with your friends, family and networks to help raise awareness of the need for ventilation monitoring.

Please also send me your thoughts and feedback - if you do, and you're keen to try a CO2 monitor for yourself I'll happily give you cost price, just get it touch!

## The importance of indoor air quality

Clean, fresh air is fundamental to life and health. That might sound obvious, but unfortunately being obvious is not enough to ensure the air we breathe is in fact always clean and healthy. Repeated studies have revealed that in many cases the air you're breathing at [school](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S1309104218302629?via%3Dihub), [in the bus or at work](https://www.rnz.co.nz/news/in-depth/470690/whose-breath-are-you-breathing) and probably also at [home](https://www.branz.co.nz/pubs/research-now/iaq/1-overview-contaminants/) falls well below the ideal of what clean, fresh air should be.

Unclean air has potential [long-term health impacts](https://www.esr.cri.nz/assets/Environmental-reports/h-Health-Effects-Air-Pollution-10Oct22.pdf) and has also been shown to [lowers cognitive performance](http://nrs.harvard.edu/urn-3:HUL.InstRepos:27662232) impacting the ability to [learn](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0360132320301074) and [work](https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1748-9326/ac1bd8) as well as [increasing the risk of transmission](https://www.phcc.org.nz/briefing/monitoring-co2-indoors-improving-ventilation-covid-19-control-tool) of respiratory illnesses like Covid-19 and the flu.

Ventilation (replacing old stale air with clean fresh air) is the most effective and economical method of improving and maintaining high indoor air quality. Most New Zealand buildings (including schools and houses) are designed to rely on manual ventilation (opening windows), while newer buildings, often including larger or commercial buildings may use mechanical ventilation involving fans and ducts. Mechanical ventilation including filtration may also be required in situations where the outdoor air is not clean and fresh such as in a city or next to a busy intersection.

## Observing the invisible

Overall air quality is a complex topic involving many contributing factors, many of which are invisible and not perceptible to us until well after adverse effects or irritation occur. This complexity and lack of visible signal is a large contributing factor to the ignorance and lack of attention towards indoor air quality that is prevalent in most buildings and indoor spaces today. Our attention is biased towards the risks that we can see, and this default bias has not been helped by public health experts until very recently also being hesitant and resistant to the idea that aerosol transmission and air quality was an important factor in preventing disease transmission. Zeynep Tufekci has a [great overview](https://www.theinsight.org/p/the-few-sentences-that-explain-much) that provides fascinating context for how an overreaction to the early incorrect theories of bad air and miasma causing disease contributed to aerosol transmission and air quality being incorrectly neglected for so long.

Correcting this history of inattention to indoor air quality is going to take time and effort, but one significant step that we can take to help start the journey to ensuring all indoor spaces have clean, healthy air is to make the invisible part visible. The concentration of Carbon Dioxide (CO2) in a space is an incredibly effective and easy to measure proxy for the ventilation of a space that we can use to provide this visibility. The atmospheric background level of CO2 is around 420 parts per million (ppm), while our exhaled breath has concentrations as high as 40,000 ppm. Without effective ventilation, one or more people breathing in an enclosed space will rapidly lead to an observable increase in CO2 concentration, which in turn provides a signal that the ventilation is insufficient and needs to be improved.

Monitoring CO2 and improving ventilation is not a panacea for all possible air quality issues, but for the majority of buildings and indoor spaces, using CO2 as a proxy for ventilation and increasing ventilation when CO2 levels rise above recommended levels is a simple, effective and achievable approach that will deliver improvements in cognitive performance and reduction in the risk of disease transmission with few, if any, downsides or risks.

## Adding clean air to our hygiene practices

We have well established expectations of hygiene for the food we eat and the water we drink and these expectations are codified in regulations that ensure those providing these services do so in a way that gives us confidence that we're not going to be at risk of illness. You may recall seeing food grade ratings prominently displayed on the walls of restaurants and cafes that you visit as an example of this.

Why should the air we breathe be treated any differently?

I think there is a strong argument that indoor air quality deserves regulation, both of the absolute quality and that the practices and achieved quality air quality of spaces where people gather and meet is clearly advertised and available. Ventilation monitoring via measurement of CO2 concentration provides an effective and achievable method that can be used to achieve this, and countries like Belgium and Japan are indeed starting to [regulate indoor air quality](https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-023-00642-9). In the UK, the independent SAGE group of scientists has published ["scores on the doors"](https://www.independentsage.org/independent-sage-signs-and-scores-on-the-doors%EF%BF%BC/), a proposal which demonstrates how CO2 monitoring can usefully help in providing information about the air quality of indoor spaces.

Unfortunately there is no movement in any of these directions in NZ yet, and no sign that regulation or even a basic campaign to raise awareness of ventilation and air quality is even being planned. This is disappointing, but even if such work was planned, it would still require appropriate ventilation monitoring products and services to enable it, and while there are some options available, it's not a fully solved space yet.

## Existing ventilation monitoring options

Until recently the available offerings for ventilation monitoring have sat at two distinct ends of the price and quality spectrum:

* Handheld "air quality meters" advertised as measuring CO2, but in reality reporting only an approximation. These meters do not contain actual CO2 sensors, and only approximate CO2 levels based on measurements of other components of the air. While cheap (often less than $100), these meters are not useful for providing reliable data that can be systematically used to assess and improve ventilation and should be avoided.

* High-end building management (BMS), and industrial measurement products targeted at large buildings such as offices or commercial applications such as food production. These systems require specialist installation, often integrated with large whole-building air conditioning systems. These systems, if appropriately configured, can be a great solution for the types of buildings and spaces that can afford them, but by their nature and cost, they do not offer a solution for majority of smaller buildings and indoor spaces where we tend to spend a lot of our time.

Over the last few years a growing number of companies have developed products that fit in between the unreliable "air quality meters" and the expensive BMS/industrial measurement products. Promising NZ-based options in this space include [Air Suite](https://www.airsuite.com/), [Tether](https://www.tether.co.nz/) and [Monkeytronics](https://www.monkeytronics.co.nz/).

These products are wall mountable, resemble a smoke alarm and utilise a WiFi network to report their measurements to a supporting web service. Pricing varies between $200-300 ex GST per unit. Monkeytronics offers direct online purchase, while Air Suite and Tether appear to be focusing on larger salesperson driven deals as there is no online purchase option or even pricing information available.

[Aranet](https://aranet.com/), while not NZ based, provide a handheld monitor - the Aranet4 Home, which is well regarded for quality and accuracy. Aranet4 Home devices are the most expensive in this space, retailing at $386 ex GST and offer a clunkier and less convenient set of connectivity options via a bluetooth connection to an associated phone. To obtain similar reporting functionality to that provided by the other products requires upgrading to their Pro model and purchasing a separate base station at a combined cost of $1255 ex GST.

Outside of the commercial product offerings there are also a number of open source DIY options available which can be built by anyone with basic electronics knowledge. The first option I encountered was [AirGradient](https://www.airgradient.com/), but within NZ there is also [Oliver Seiler's CO2 Monitor](https://github.com/oseiler2/CO2Monitor). These open source options have a parts cost in the $100-$150 range, depending on volume built and provide high-quality measurements via trusted NDIR CO2 sensors while also offering huge flexibility in terms of how they operate, interact with users and potential supporting web services.

## My early forays into ventilation monitoring

I started looking into ventilation monitoring in detail last year when I wanted to ensure that the classrooms of our local primary school were well ventilated during the Omicron outbreak. That research uncovered most of the products and projects above, and while the commercial offerings from Air Suite, Tether, Monkeytronics and Aranet provide high quality measurements, the cost of deploying 20+ of them across a school presented a challenge, while the user interface and functionality is also not a perfect match to what is required.

For buildings designed to use manual ventilation (e.g. most school classrooms and other small buildings in NZ), effective ventilation requires the occupants to have awareness of the need to open windows/doors when the CO2 concentration (our chosen indication of insufficient ventilation) is increasing. The commercial monitors provide only a very subtle in-room indication or greyscale screen, only readable from close-up, which does not easily and obviously alert the room occupants when additional ventilation is required. By contrast, the open source CO2 Monitor designed by Oliver Seiler excels, providing a clear "traffic-light" style Red, Orange, Green set of lights which simply and obviously help the occupants of the room understand what action to take at the present time.

I built and deployed a set of monitors based on Oliver's design to our local school at a cost of $135 per device. These have been running smoothly for nearly a year now. The benefits of their presence can be clearly seen in the monitoring - CO2 concentration drops sharply right after a threshold where the lights change colour is reached indicating the intended action of increasing ventilation is taking place. Initially this happened more frequently, but over time it's possible to see that low concentrations of CO2, indicating good ventilation levels, are now regularly achieved across the school day thanks to simple changes in behaviour, such as leaving windows cracked open.

I found building the monitors and the supporting software services enjoyable, and it is rewarding to see the improvements in air quality that they can drive for the school. These benefits should be available to everyone, but I don't see any widespread deployment of air quality and ventilation monitoring occurring. I decided to explore how I could extend the work I'd done for the school into a ventilation monitoring product that could be offered to others and launched [co2mon.nz](https://co2mon.nz/).

## Small businesses and organisations need ventilation monitoring

Most NZ classrooms do not yet have ongoing ventilation monitoring, but unfortunately the opportunity to rapidly improve that is low. The Ministry of Education has already distributed a couple of Aranet4 Home devices to each school, and is also driving a long term Indoor Environment Monitoring (IEM) project that will cover ventilation and which Air Suite and Monkeytronics have contracts to supply monitors for. Even though none of these efforts appear to be making any immediate or rapid progress on enabling widespread classroom ventilation monitoring, the existence of the Aranet4 monitors and the future IEM plans significantly hinder any demand or willingness to purchase other ventilation monitoring solutions that could be provided now.

With schools out of the picture, and large buildings and offices already covered by existing BMS products, it's the multitude of small businesses and organisations who own, operate and manage many of the buildings we visit on a day to day basis where I think there is a significant need and opportunity for ventilation monitoring to be deployed. While a big part of the lack of current action here is likely the lack of awareness of the need for it, none of the existing products or companies appear to be marketing to or targeting this group, providing an opportunity that I can address.

Informally testing this opportunity with family and friends running small businesses over the last few months has resulted in promising feedback. One particular success story was the discovery of a fresh air duct on the air conditioning unit in a small office that had never been connected to the outside air and was simply recirculating air from the ceiling space back into an office! The resulting stuffiness and poor air quality had been noticed, but without the clear indication from the CO2 monitor that the air conditioning was actually making things worse, rather than better, the underlying issue had not been understood. With the issue fixed and the duct now connected, that business is now enjoying much more productive and healthy working conditions.

I suspect many other similar poor air quality situations and opportunities for improvement are lurking and waiting to be revealed.

## Challenges

Given this initial positive feedback (admitted from a biased audience), I'm excited to explore the opportunity to help small businesses with ventilation monitoring further, but I know there's going to be a number of challenges to overcome first.

### Awareness, Demand and Product Market Fit.

Selling a service for a problem that the target market is not aware they have sounds hard, and coupled closely with this, finding the right shape of product and service to prove attractive in filling that demand if/when it can be stimulated is not made any easier by the limitations on the volume of feedback that low demand is likely to deliver.

As formidable as these challenges might be, I think the approach I outlined in my [goals]({{< relref "2023-goals.md#product-development" >}}) to how I want to build my business provides a good mitigation to this risk. Specifically, my intent is to start slowly and build a business with positive unit cost economics, low burn rate and overheads from early on. This avoids the typical startup/venture backed dynamic of needing to find fast growth, and significant scale to deliver return on investment before the money runs out, which I think, given the low awareness and need to stimulate demand, runs a very real risk of not being a good fit for this situation.

My experience to date from the school deployment and subsequent testing with friends and family is that achieving sustainable unit cost economics is feasible at the software and hardware level. If we ignore the initial sunk cost of my time developing the business to this stage for just a second and consider only ongoing effort required, each new monitor and customer I add from now on will be  profitable, requiring little ongoing maintenance or support, and this remains true even at fairly discounted prices compared to the other options in the market.

I do value my time, and don't plan to ignore it in practice, but separating the underlying economics of sustaining existing customers from the one-off investment or series of investments used to build and grow the business provides two useful things. First it forces me to build in a way that maintains the profitable unit-cost economics and low overheads I am targeting. My goal is that even with small numbers of customers and low growth rates I can continue to offer a profitable and useful service to existing customers with little to no further time investment. Secondly it means that when considering each project or effort to grow the business that I could invest time into, I'm not forced to feel the need to do it to sustain the business, but can decide whether or not to do it based on the expected benefits compared to the opportunity cost of not pursuing other projects or businesses I could be investing time into instead.

You could call this the slow and steady wins the race strategy - I think it has promise for making progress in a situation where the target market has low awareness of the problem you're trying to solve. It allows a useful level of value and service to be continually delivered, while enabling iteration and experiments to stimulate additional demand and growth to take place as and when the situation and environment makes them attractive, rather than on a time frame forced by burn rate and need to demonstrate a rapid return on capital invested. The risk that its the wrong strategy and a more startup-like approach with better funding and staffing would have a higher change of succeeding remains, but I'm comfortable taking a bet on that, and I think the slow and steady strategy is a better fit with my overall goals and approach.

### Hardware

My experience, skills and business goals lean towards software not hardware. Software is a key enabler of the service I plan to offer, but the hardware to perform and report the CO2 measurements is the critical component, without which there is no business.

The first few batches of monitors I've personally built have gone well, but establishing an outsourced production pipeline will be one of the investments of time required to continue growing the business. It's never been easier to produce quality hardware via this type of outsourcing than it is today, but there are still a lot of additional risks involved in managing the supply chain, ensuring regulatory compliance and managing working capital to purchase and build monitors before they are sold to customers that need to be managed in addition to the time investment of making this happen.

Based on my initial investigation of this space, there are several potential NZ and overseas providers I can work which look very promising, but require long (e.g. 6-8 week) iteration cycles when things are going well, and even longer if mistakes or design failures occur along the way. The worst case scenario is to stimulate demand that is then unable to be fulfilled promptly due to hardware issues.

My back-up plan if outsourcing production of bespoke CO2 monitors does not proceed to plan is to customise and resell an existing CO2 monitor produced by another party. This would require compromises in features and level of integration with my service and be more expensive than outsourced production, but would provide a short-term strategy to keep the business moving while the hardware pipeline is matured. Whether a manufacturer of suitable CO2 monitors would be open to this kind of white-label reselling of their product is an open question, and may be a hard sell if they perceive my business as direct competition. But if hardware issues do come up, this is the plan I expect to try first.

### Competition

Pursuing a slower, bootstrapped path raises the risk that a larger, better resourced competitor with economies of scale and the benefits of a more established brand could easily outcompete my business and win the market.

The existing NZ products from Air Suite, Tether and Monkeytronics as well as plenty of other potential competitors are each potential risks in this way, but as briefly discussed in the review of [existing ventilation monitoring options](#existing-ventilation-monitoring-options) there does not appear to be any focus on the small business market I want to target from these businesses. While it's inevitable that will change at some point, it's likely that might be some time away given my assessment of their business models. If I were a venture backed business, pursing scale to make a return for my investors, my incentive is to focus on larger deals from a smaller number of customers where the profitability and return on effort is higher than in selling to many different small business customers.

My strategy then, is to take advantage of the current gap and opportunity to build a customer base and refine my product now, while there appears to be little competition for this small business market. If and when competition arrives, so long as I've stayed true and achieved my goal of building a business with profitable unit cost economics then any of the potential scenarios that may occur are acceptable to me. That could range from having found a product market fit that provides a competitive advantage and allows my business to keep growing even in the face of competition, to seeing all growth stop and only retaining existing customers, or any mix in between.

## Next Steps

Having spent the last several months thinking a lot about the opportunity and weighing it up against the other potential projects and businesses I could choose to work on instead, I've come to the conclusion that I do want to invest more time in the opportunity that I see to help small businesses improve their ventilation monitoring and air quality. Specifically, I'm going to pursue three particular areas of work:

1. Begin sales and marketing efforts for the existing [co2mon.nz](https://co2mon.nz/) product (selling a physical monitor + ongoing monthly subscription to the web service). The aim of this is to further validate that demand for ventilation monitoring in the small business and organisation space does exist outside of the friends and family I've been selling to so far, and to start getting a broader range of feedback and input on the desired product and service functionality.

2. Develop a short-term all-inclusive rental service that targets businesses or organisations that are curious to evaluate their air quality and ventilation as a one-off activity, but are not convinced of the value of investing in ongoing monitoring, or the outright purchase of a monitor. Having this offering available provides an easy and low-risk entry point, but also keeps the door open to enable offering an ongoing monthly rental to customers, or to offer to put the initial rental cost towards the purchase of the monitor if desired.

3. Iterate and evolve the hardware design, and establish the outsourced production pipeline as discussed above.

While much of this work will be driven by me, I am planning to bring on some contracted sales and marketing expertise to help with the first two areas of work, as it's not something I have experience in, nor is that sort of activity my natural strength!

If you're excited by the potential of ventilation monitoring to help improve indoor air quality I would love to hear from you, and I'd love your help sharing the word, either by sharing this post, or a link to [co2mon.nz](https://co2mon.nz/) with your friends, family and networks.