---
title: Ventilation Monitoring as a Service
date: 2023-02-06T12:26:43+13:00
draft: true

categories:
  - Technology
  - Business
---


The importance of clean, fresh indoor air is one of the most tangible lessons we can learn from the Covid-19 pandemic. Clean, fresh air is not only an incredibly effective risk mitigation for reducing the spread of coronaviruses (and other respiratory illnesses), but has always been important to enable effective cognitive performance.

Monitoring indoor air quality is relatively easy to do, but traditionally has not been a key focus for many of us. I believe air quality monitoring should be accessible to everyone for any indoor space, and for highly occupied indoor spaces should be provided on a continuous basis. Last year, I started [co2mon.nz](https://co2mon.nz/) to enable that monitoring for our local primary school and the service continues to run supporting the school, some local businesses and a few other individuals around NZ.

In this post, the first of a [series](/categories/business) exploring business ideas, I'm going to describe my plans to expand [co2mon.nz](https://co2mon.nz/) into a product which can improve the accessibility of ventilation monitoring for small businesses and organisations in New Zealand. I'm going to discuss:

{{< toc >}}

It's not a sure thing, but I think I've found a gap in existing offerings which I have a reasonable opportunity to fill. Success in meeting that opportunity will deliver a nice SaaS business to add to my portfolio while also accelerating the deployment of ventilation monitoring that improves the environment of many indoor spaces, contributing to better health and improved productivity.

Jump straight to the [next steps](#the-plan-for-iteration-two) if you want the short version, or keep reading to understand the opportunity I see and the approach I'm taking in detail.

Please share [co2mon.nz](https://co2mon.nz/) or this post with your friends, family and networks to help raise awareness of the need for ventilation monitoring, and please also send me your thoughts and feedback - if you do, and you're keen to try a CO2 monitor for yourself I'll happily give you cost price, just get it touch!

## The importance of indoor air quality

Clean, fresh air is fundamental to life and health. That might sound obvious, but unfortunately being obvious is not enough to ensure the air we breathe is in fact always clean and healthy. Repeated studies have revealed that in many cases the air you're breathing at [school](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S1309104218302629?via%3Dihub), [in the bus or at work](https://www.rnz.co.nz/news/in-depth/470690/whose-breath-are-you-breathing) and probably also at [home](https://www.branz.co.nz/pubs/research-now/iaq/1-overview-contaminants/) falls well below the ideal of what clean, fresh air should be.

There's no simple explanation for why we commonly overlook this important aspect of health, but potential contributing factors include:
 * Complexity and visibility. Air quality involves many different variables: temperature, humidity, particulate matter and the level of carbon dioxide (CO2) and other pollutants such as nitrogen oxides (NO2) all play a role. Other than temperature and humidity, most of these are not easily perceivable until well after adverse effects or irritation occurs.
 * Historical resistance and bias. Up until very recently, aerosol transmission of disease has not been widely accepted, as we saw very clearly with the original (incorrect) rejection of the risk of aerosol transmission of Covid-19. There's [a compelling case](https://www.nytimes.com/2021/05/07/opinion/coronavirus-airborne-transmission.html) that fear of repeating the mistakes of the early medical theories of miasma and bad air played a large role in the scientific and medical communities overlooking aerosol transmission as a vector.

 I think that history, complexity and our general attention bias towards problems which we can see and focus on provides a reasonable explanation for why air quality is so often overlooked.

In addition to potential [long-term health impacts](https://www.esr.cri.nz/assets/Environmental-reports/h-Health-Effects-Air-Pollution-10Oct22.pdf), poor air quality [lowers cognitive performance](http://nrs.harvard.edu/urn-3:HUL.InstRepos:27662232) impacting the ability to [learn](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0360132320301074) or [work](https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1748-9326/ac1bd8) effectively and [increases the risk of transmission of diseases](https://www.phcc.org.nz/briefing/monitoring-co2-indoors-improving-ventilation-covid-19-control-tool) like Covid-19 and other respiratory illnesses.

**We need to stop overlooking indoor air quality!**

Ventilation (replacing old stale air with clean fresh air) is the most effective and economical method of improving and maintaining high indoor air quality. Most New Zealand buildings (including schools and houses) are designed to rely on manual ventilation (opening windows), while newer buildings, often including larger or commercial buildings may use mechanical ventilation involving fans and ducts.

## Observing the invisible

Ventilation by any method can provide an effective strategy to maintain clean, fresh and healthy indoor air, but in order to know whether the current level of ventilation is actually achieving that goal or not we need a way of observing the invisible. While many different types of sensors and measurement equipment exist that can provide this visibility into each aspect of air quality, it's usually simpler and more effective to focus on a single measurement that is an accurate representative of the overall situation.

The concentration of Carbon Dioxide (CO2) is one such measurement that is commonly used for this purpose. CO2 provides a simple and effective measure of air quality due to the difference between our exhaled breath and the fresh, clean outdoor air. The atmospheric background level of CO2 is around 420 parts per million (ppm), while our exhaled breath has concentrations as high as 40,000 ppm. Without ventilation, one or more people breathing in an enclosed space will rapidly lead to an observable increase in CO2 concentration.

Measuring that concentration of CO2 can be accurately and affordably achieved using a small electronic [NDIR](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nondispersive_infrared_sensor) sensor integrated with a basic microcontroller.

## Adding clean air to our hygiene practices

We have well established expectations and routines for maintaining hygiene of the other key inputs to our bodies in the water we drink and the food that we consume. The provision of these necessities are well regulated and reliable, visible reporting is often required and provided to provide assurance that water supplies and food suppliers such as restaurants, cafes and bars have processes and procedures in place to keep us safe.

Given the importance we've established above to our health and cognitive performance from the quality of the air around us - why should the air we breathe be treated any differently?

This argument is [gaining traction around the world](https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-023-00642-9), but still remains a long way away from meeting the standards we apply to food and water. The independent SAGE group of scientists in the UK have published a proposal for publishing ventilation ["scores on the doors"](https://www.independentsage.org/independent-sage-signs-and-scores-on-the-doors%EF%BF%BC/) which provides a simple and effective form of information sharing similar to the food grade, or energy efficiency ratings. I think this approach has huge potential and would love to see it be adopted widely and CO2 monitoring provides an efficient and effective means to evaluate and provide the necessary data to support the scores.

There is no movement in this direction in NZ yet, and no sign that similar regulation or even a basic campaign to raise awareness is even being planned. While this is disappointing, even if such work was planned, it would still require appropriate ventilation monitoring products and services to enable it, and while there are some options available, it's not a fully solved space yet.

## Existing ventilation monitoring options

Historically the available offerings for ventilation monitoring have sat at two distinct ends of the price and quality spectrum:

* Handheld "air quality meters" advertised as measuring CO2, but in reality reporting only an approximation. These meters do not contain NDIR CO2 sensors, and only approximate CO2 levels based on measurements of other components of the air. While cheap (often less than $100), these types of devices have been shown to provide unreliable and wildly varying readings when in proximity to substances such as alcohol based hand sanitizers.

* High-end building management (BMS), and industrial measurement products, often in the $1000+ price range, targeted at large buildings such as offices or commercial applications such as food production. Usually requiring specialist installation, sometimes within ducting or integrated with a larger air conditioning system, the accuracy and performance of these devices is not a concern, but they are obviously not applicable or accessible to many smaller businesses or buildings.

Over the last few years a growing number of companies have developed products that fit in between the unreliable "air quality meters" and the expensive BMS/industrial measurement products - offering high quality NDIR based CO2 monitors in a standalone format. Promising NZ-based options in this space include [Air Suite](https://www.airsuite.com/), [Tether](https://www.tether.co.nz/) and [Monkeytronics](https://www.monkeytronics.co.nz/).

These products are wall mountable, resemble a smoke alarm and utilise a WiFi network to report their measurements to a supporting web service. Pricing varies between $200-300 ex GST per unit. Monkeytronics offers direct online purchase, while Air Suite and Tether appear to be focusing on larger salesperson driven deals as there is no online purchase option or even pricing information available.

[Aranet](https://aranet.com/), while not NZ based, provide a handheld monitor - the Aranet4 Home, which has a NDIR sensor and is well regarded for quality and accuracy. Aranet4 Home devices are the most expensive in this space, retailing at $386 ex GST and offer a clunkier and less convenient set of connectivity options via a bluetooth connection to an associated phone. To obtain similar reporting functionality to that provided by the other products requires upgrading to their Pro model and purchasing a separate base station at a combined cost of $1255 ex GST.

Outside of the commercial product offerings there are also a number of open source DIY options available which can be built by anyone with basic electronics knowledge. The first option I encountered was [AirGradient](https://www.airgradient.com/), but within NZ there is also [Oliver Seiler's CO2 Monitor](https://github.com/oseiler2/CO2Monitor). These open source options have a parts cost in the $100-$150 range, depending on volume built and provide high-quality measurements via trusted NDIR CO2 sensors while also offering huge flexibility in terms of how they operate, interact with users and potential supporting web services.

## My early forays into ventilation monitoring

I started looking into ventilation monitoring in detail last year when I wanted to ensure that the classrooms of our local primary school were well ventilated during the Omicron outbreak. That research uncovered most of the products and projects above, and while the commercial offerings from Air Suite, Tether, Monkeytronics and Aranet provide high quality measurements, the cost of deploying 20+ of them across a school presented a challenge, while the user interface and functionality is also not a perfect match to what is required.

For buildings designed to use manual ventilation (e.g. most school classrooms and other small buildings in NZ), effective ventilation requires the occupants to have awareness of the need to open windows/doors when the CO2 concentration (our chosen indication of insufficient ventilation) is increasing. The commercial monitors provide only a very subtle in-room indication or greyscale screen, only readable from close-up, which does not easily and obviously alert the room occupants when additional ventilation is required. By contrast, the open source CO2 Monitor designed by Oliver Seiler excels, providing a clear "traffic-light" style Red, Orange, Green set of lights which simply and obviously help the occupants of the room understand what action to take at the present time.

I built and deployed a set of monitors based on Oliver's design to our local school, coming in at a cost of $135 per device. These have been running smoothly for nearly a year now. The benefits of their presence can be clearly seen in the monitoring - CO2 concentration drops sharply right after a threshold where the lights change colour is reached indicating the intended action of increasing ventilation is taking place. Initially this happened more frequently, but over time it's possible to see that low concentrations of CO2, indicating good ventilation levels, are now regularly achieved across the school day thanks to simple changes in behaviour, such as leaving windows cracked open.

I enjoyed building the monitors and the supporting software services and it also felt good to have supported the local school in this way, but I'm disappointed that widespread deployment of ventilation monitoring is still not being prioritised in other schools, businesses and buildings across our community. Shortly after completing the project with the school I decided to explore explore whether there was an opportunity to extend what I had built to date to offer a ventilation monitoring product to others and launched [co2mon.nz](https://co2mon.nz/).

## Finding a target market

Schools were my initial target market. Unfortunately it quickly became apparent that both short and long-term actions taken by the Ministry of Education in this space make selling further ventilation monitoring to schools extremely challenging. Firstly, in 2022 MoE distributed several Aranet4 Home devices to each school. These can be useful for ad-hoc testing and assessment of the ventilation in a space, but are a poor substitute for a permanently connected monitor with a clear, easily interpretable indication of ventilation status and associated long-term data records in a web service. However their distribution, even when not well utilized, creates the impression that CO2 monitoring is a solved problem for many schools. In the longer-term, the Ministry's Indoor Environmental Monitoring (IEM) project requires monitoring, including of ventilation, in all newly built or renovated classrooms, which is great to see. Monkeytronics and Air Suite have won contracts to supply parts of this IEM program, but competing in this space would require expanding out of just ventilation monitoring to cover additional factors like noise and light as well, which I'm not keen to take on at the present time.

It is frustrating not to be able to help accelerate classroom air quality improvements through rapid deployment of effective ventilation monitors due to these factors. The IEM programs are good, but being coupled to the 5-10 year building renewal and renovation time frames significantly curtails the hope of any short-term improvements in improving learning and health outcomes through improved ventilation and air quality.

With schools ruled out as a target market, the next biggest opportunity to make a significant improvement is the multitude of indoor spaces where we spend time gathering together on a daily basis. Large offices form part of this, but tend to already be covered by a BMS or large air conditioning system in that existing market segment. It's the multitude of smaller businesses and organisations which make up the majority of the NZ economy, and the majority of locations by number where we spend time where I see the need and opportunity to make a difference. Places like your local coffee shop, cafe, hairdresser, small business offices, club rooms and churches, etc, etc. I don't yet see any widespread movement to monitor or improve ventilation in these places. A big part of this is likely lack of awareness of the need for it, but that lack of awareness is also partly driven by the fact that none of the existing products appear to be marketed or targeted to this group.

I've had some interest in ventilation monitoring from family and friends running small businesses. One particular success story was the discovery of a fresh air duct on an air conditioning unit that had never been connected to the outside air and was simply recirculating air from the ceiling space back into an office! The resulting stuffiness and poor air quality had been noticed, but without the clear indication from the CO2 monitor that the air conditioning was actually making things worse, rather than better, the underlying issue had not been understood. With the issue fixed and the duct now connected, that business is now enjoying much more productive and healthy working conditions. I suspect many other similar poor air quality situations and opportunities for improvement are lurking and waiting to be revealed.

## Challenges

Given this initial positive feedback (admitted from a biased audience), I'm excited to explore the opportunity to help small businesses with ventilation monitoring further, but I know there's going to be a number of challenges to overcome first.

### Awareness, Demand and Product Market Fit.

The awareness of the importance of clean air, and subsequent demand for ventilation monitoring is extremely low today, including in the target market of small businesses and organisations where I think the opportunity to make a difference lies. Trying to sell a service for a problem that the target market is not necessarily aware they have is going to be challenging, and coupled closely with this, finding the right shape of product and service to prove attractive in filling that demand if/when it can be stimulated is also not a problem to be underestimated.

As formidable as these challenges might be, I think that my [goals]({{< relref "2023-goals.md#product-development" >}}) to bootstrap and grow a small to medium sized SaaS business is well suited to mitigating the risk. My preference is to start slowly and build a business with positive unit cost economics, low burn rate and overheads from early on. Avoiding the typical startup/venture backed fast growth, significant scale business model means I won't face the time and funding pressure to quickly find product market fit before the money runs out, which given the low awareness would be a very real existential challenge if I took that path.

My experience to date from the school deployment and subsequent testing with friends and family is that achieving sustainable unit cost economics is quite feasible at the software and hardware level. If we ignore the initial sunk cost of my time developing the business to this stage for just a second and consider only ongoing effort required, it's already true that each new monitor and customer is profitable, requiring little ongoing maintenance or support, and this remains true even at fairly discounted prices compared to the other options in the market.

Obviously I do value my time, and don't plan to ignore it in practice, but separating the underlying economics of sustaining the business from the one-off investment or series of investments in time used to build and grow the business in this way does two useful things. First it forces me to build in a way that maintains profitable unit-cost economics and low overheads - my goal is that even with small numbers of customers and low growth rates I can confidently and sustainably continue to offer a useful service with little to not further time investment. Secondly it allows me to evaluate whether to invest more time developing and growing the business as a matter of opportunity cost vs the other potential projects and businesses I could be investing time into.

You could call this the slow and steady wins the race strategy - I think it has promise for making progress in a situation where the target market has low awareness of the problem you're trying to solve by allowing a base level of value and service to be delivered, while enabling iteration and experiments to stimulate additional demand and growth to take place as and when the time is justified. It's certainly true that a riskier, faster, better staffed approach might achieve more and be more successful as a business than what I'm trying, but from where I stand and given my goals, I'd rather take the risk of picking the wrong strategy here and achieving a smaller level of impact, than the risk of not being able to find product market fit in time.

I don't know if it's a good strategy, but it's a strategy I'm excited to try and learn more about.

### Hardware

My experience, skills and business goals lean towards building software focused businesses. While software is a key component of the potential value that can be offered here, the ability to offer a useful software based service is entirely dependent on the physical monitoring hardware that measures and reports the CO2 concentration.

The initial batches of monitors I've personally built have gone very smoothly, but establishing an outsourced production pipeline will be one of the investments of time required to continue growing the business. It's never been easier to produce quality hardware via this type of process than it is today, but there are still a lot of additional risks involved in managing the supply chain, ensuring regulatory compliance and managing working capital to purchase and build monitors before they are sold to customers that need to be considered in addition to the cost of the time involved itself.

Based on my initial investigation of this space, there are several potential NZ or overseas providers I can work which look very promising, but potentially involve quite long (e.g. 6-8 week) iteration cycles when things are going well, and even longer if mistakes or design failures occur along the way. The worst case scenario here would be to successfully stimulate demand that is then unable to be fulfilled promptly due to hardware availability issues.

A potential back-up plan if outsourcing production of bespoke CO2 monitors does not proceed to plan would be to customise and resell an existing CO2 monitor produced by another party. This is likely to require some compromises in feature set and be more expensive than outsourced production, but could be a viable short-term strategy to keep the overall business moving while the hardware pipeline is matured. Whether the manufacturer of another CO2 monitor would be open to this kind of white-label business model is an open question, and may be a hard sell if they perceive my business as direct competition. But if hardware issues do come up, it's worth investigating.

### Competition

Choosing to pursue a slower, bootstrapped path to addressing the target market raises the risk that a larger, better resourced competitor with economies of scale and the benefits of a more established brand, etc could easily outcompete my business and win the market.

Air Suite, Tether and Monkeytronics all fit that description of larger and better resourced, not to mention plenty of other potential competitors that may exist as well, but as briefly discussed in the review of [existing ventilation monitoring options](#existing-ventilation-monitoring-options) above none of these businesses appear to be focusing on the small business market presently. I think there's a reasonable underlying explanation for that linked to the structure of business. If I were a venture backed business, pursing scale to make a return for my investors, my incentive is to focus on larger deals from a smaller number of customers where the profitability and return on effort is higher than in selling to many different small business customers.

Even if that were to change in future, or another competitor appears, I think opportunity to build a customer base now, while there appears to be little competition in the small business market, combined with the goal to have profitable unit cost economics from an early stage provides a reasonable mitigation to the risk of competition. Potential outcomes I see range from achieving a product market fit that is attractive to a range of small businesses or a niche that is not profitable for others to compete in and continue seeing growth even in the face of competition to seeing growth flatten or stop leaving only existing customers when competition arrives, or any mix in between. Regardless of where along that spectrum the business lands, assuming the goal of sustainable unit cost economics has been met, then I will have achieved [the goal]({{< relref "2023-goals.md#product-development" >}}) of building the first of a portfolio of SaaS businesses.

## Next Steps

Firstly, I plan to begin some sales and marketing efforts for the existing [co2mon.nz](https://co2mon.nz/) product offering (selling a physical monitor + ongoing monthly subscription to the web service). The aim of this is to further validate that demand for ventilation monitoring in the small business and organisation space does exist outside of the friends and family I've been selling to so far, and to start getting a broader range of feedback and input on the desired product and service functionality that small businesses would find attractive. I think this will be a combination of in-person outreach to local businesses around Cambridge and Hamilton and broader online campaigns.

Secondly, I want to develop a short-term all-inclusive rental product that might appeal to businesses or organisations that are curious to evaluate their air quality and ventilation as a one-off activity, but are not convinced of the value of investing in ongoing monitoring, or the outright purchase of a monitor. Having this offering available provides an easy and low-risk entry point, but also keeps the door open to enable offering an ongoing monthly rental to customers, or all them to put the initial rental cost towards the purchase of the monitor if desired.

Finally, the third piece of work I'll pursue in parallel to the sales and product work is establishing the outsourced production pipeline and associated iteration and improvement of the product as discussed above.

While much of this work will be driven by me, I am planning to bring on some contracted sales and marketing expertise to help with the first piece of work, as it's not something I have experience in, nor is that sort of activity my natural strength!

If you're excited by the potential of ventilation monitoring to help improve indoor air quality I would love to hear from you, and I'd love your help sharing the word, either by sharing this post, or a link to [co2mon.nz](https://co2mon.nz/) with your friends, family and networks.