---
title: "Retrospective: Mar 2023"
date: 2023-04-03T14:24:13+12:00

categories:
  - Retrospectives
---

The key decision I made mid-March was to commit to pursuing [ventilation monitoring]({{% relref "2023-03-28-ventilation.md" %}}) as my primary product development focus.

Prior to that decision, I hoped to use my [writing plan]({{% relref "2023-02-03-writing-plan.md" %}}) to drive a breadth-first survey of the opportunities for each of [my product ideas]({{% relref "2023-goals.md#product-development" %}}) before deciding which had the best business potential to focus on first. Two factors changed my mind:

1. As noted last month, I'm finding the writing process much slower and harder than I expected – the survey across all the ideas may not complete until mid-year or later!
2. I've realised that having begun building [co2mon.nz](https://co2mon.nz/) last year, to stop work on the project at this point would leave me feeling that I had not done justice to developing the product and testing the market - seeing it to a conclusion is important to me.

This decision is an explicit choice to prioritize seeing a project through to a conclusion (successful, or otherwise) regardless of whether or not it has the highest potential of the various ideas I could invest time into. I'm comfortable making that trade-off in this instance, but I am going to bound my time investment to two months. I'll evaluate at the end of May whether I'm seeing sufficient traction and potential to justify continuing further with the idea.

I had only one fully uninterrupted work week in March due to a combination of days out due to school trips, two LandSAR call outs and various farm maintenance tasks. April will be similarly disrupted given school holidays and a planned family trip to Brisbane. Sharpening my focus feels particularly necessary given this reality to ensure I'm not spread overly thin.


## Goal Scoring

See [last month's retrospective]({{% relref "2023-03-04-feb-retro.md#monthly-scoring-rubric" %}}) for a refresher on my scoring methodology.

#### Consulting - 4/10

Goal: *Execute a series of successful consulting engagements, building a reputation for myself and leaving happy customers willing to provide testimonials that support a pipeline of future opportunities.*

Consulting hours were down from February, hitting only 31% of target this month as the client didn't make use of all the hours I had allocated for them. I didn't invest any time in advertising my services or developing new clients or projects over the month, which will now become a priority for April.


#### Product Development - 4/10

Goal: *Grow my product development skill set by taking several ideas to MVP stage with customer feedback received, and launch at least one product which generates revenue and has growth potential.*

With the new focus entirely on [co2mon.nz](https://co2mon.nz/), I spent a lot of time re-working and developing my thinking around how I want to take this forward, specifically trying to analyse where I saw an opportunity in the market. After attending a workshop on finding product market fit using quantifiable metrics at the Southern SaaS conference this month, I've realised that much of the time I spent on this analysis is too insular and focused on my own observations - I need to get out and talk to a lot more people and get more feedback on their needs and understanding of the space instead. Seems obvious in retrospect!

I also spent a few days beginning to build another batch of prototype CO2 monitors so I have some units to use for experimentation and testing with potential customers as I get out and have those conversations. I can probably build one or two more batches of prototype monitors before needing to look at PCB assembly in earnest.

#### Professional Network Development - 8/10

Goal: *To build a professional relationship with at least 30 new people this year*.

This goal continues to be my highlight with 8 new contacts added this month and catch-ups with 4 existing people I had not spoken to for a while. I joined the [KiwiSaaS central](https://central.kiwisaas.com/) community and attended the [SouthernSaas](https://www.southernsaas.nz/website/50983/) conference this month as well, which has been time well spent given the workshop learnings discussed above.

#### Writing - 3/10

Goal: *To publish a high-quality piece of writing on this site at least once a week*.

I published a single post, the first half of my updated [ventilation monitoring]({{% relref "2023-03-28-ventilation.md" %}}) business plan. I continue to find the writing process much harder and slower than I hoped or expected and remain well below my target publishing rate, but one post is better than zero!

I tested working with an editor I contracted via [UpWork](https://www.upwork.com/) who provided some very useful feedback on the structure of my writing which helped to unblock some of my progress. I plan to continue doing this for at least a few more posts.

#### Community - 5/10

Goal: *To support the growth of my local technical community by volunteering my experience and knowledge with others through activities such as mentoring, conference talks and similar.*

* I completed my review assignments for the [SREcon23 APAC](https://www.usenix.org/conference/srecon23apac) program committee. The conference looks to have a very exciting line up of talks scheduled, unfortunately the 2 talks I proposed didn't make the cut with my fellow PC members.

* I was assigned and [completed a review](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/review-ietf-dnsop-svcb-https-12-dnsdir-lc-brown-2023-04-02/) of [draft-ietf-dnsop-svcb-https-12](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-ietf-dnsop-svcb-https/) as part of my participation in the [IETF DNS directorate](https://wiki.ietf.org/en/group/dnsdir).


## Feedback

As always, I'd love to hear from you if you have thoughts or feedback triggered by anything I've written above.