---
title: co2mon.nz
date: 2023-03-25T11:41:21+13:00
draft: true

categories:
  - Technology
  - Business
---

Last week, I explained [why ventilation monitoring]({{% relref "2023-03-28-ventilation.md" %}}) is important, and the opportunity I see to help accelerate deployment of high quality ventilation monitoring for small businesses and organisations.

In this post, I'm going to introduce the prototype service, [co2mon.nz](https://co2mon.nz/), that I built last year to begin experimenting in this space, and discuss my thoughts on what would be required to evolve it into a sustainable business. Specifically, we'll look at:

{{< toc >}}

## My journey to ventilation monitoring

I started looking into ventilation monitoring in detail last year when I wanted to ensure that the classrooms of our local primary school were well ventilated during the Omicron outbreak. That research revealed that the existing products on offer were challenging to deploy in a school environment from a cost perspective while also not providing a perfect set of functionality.

I built and deployed a set of monitors based on [Oliver Seiler's design](https://github.com/oseiler2/CO2Monitor) to our local school, along with a corresponding set of software and web services that provide management of the monitors and visibility into the collected data and trends. These devices and the associated software services have been running smoothly for nearly a year now, and the benefit of the monitoring is evident - CO2 concentration drops immediately after a threshold where the lights change colour is reached, indicating the intended action of increasing ventilation is taking place. Initially this occurs more frequently, but over time low concentrations of CO2, indicating good ventilation levels, are regularly achieved across the school day thanks to simple changes in routine, such as leaving windows cracked open, now being established.

As the benefits of the project to the school became clear, my ambition and vision for ventilation monitoring grew from wanting to see my children learn in a safe and effective environment to desiring safe and effective learning, working, living and social spaces for everyone. I found the build of the hardware and software for the project enjoyable and combined with the apparent lack of focus on deploying ventilation monitoring that I have observed, it feels like the project has provided the basic building blocks from which to explore and grow a business that could accelerate progress towards ventilation monitoring becoming widespread.

## co2mon.nz: Ventilation monitoring as a service prototype

I created co2mon.nz (descriptively named after CO2 monitoring) with some very basic product and marking pages alongside the monitoring and management functionality for the physical monitors that is available to logged in users. The initial product offering is the physical monitor, bundled with a monthly subscription service for the monitoring and management.

### Prototype CO2 monitor

The monitor provides the primary interface for occupants of the space, allowing real-time monitoring of ventilation and action such as opening windows to be taken if and when required.
co2mon.nz offers a high-quality physical CO2 monitor with a clear and actionable indication of air quality via the red, orange, green "traffic light" style light display and associated screen.

### Monitoring and management software

In addition to the real-time support provided by the physical monitor, the supporting web service provides management and configuration for the monitors and records the measurements to provide graphs and analysis of ventilation status over time - allowing analysis of ventilation strategy and provide supporting data to reveal or justify the need for improvements in ventilation.

### Current usage


## Areas of development

Given this initial positive feedback (admitted from a biased audience), I am excited to further explore the opportunity to help small businesses with ventilation monitoring, but I know there are going to be a number of challenges to overcome.

### Awareness, Demand and Product Market Fit.

Selling a service for a problem that the target market is not aware they have sounds hard. Coupled closely with this is the fact that, finding the right shape of product and service to prove attractive in filling that demand if/when it can be stimulated is not made any easier by the limitations on the volume of feedback that low demand is likely to deliver.

As formidable as these challenges might be, I think the approach I outlined in my [goals]({{< relref "2023-goals.md#product-development" >}}) to how I want to build my business provides a good mitigation to this risk. Specifically, my intent is to start slowly and build a business with positive unit cost economics, low burn rate and overheads from early on. This avoids the typical startup/venture backed dynamic of needing to find fast growth, and significant scale to deliver return on investment before the money runs out, which I think, given the low awareness and need to stimulate demand, runs a very real risk of not being a good fit for this situation.

### Hardware

My experience, skills and business goals lean towards software not hardware. Software is a key enabler of the service I plan to offer, but the hardware to perform and report the CO2 measurements is the critical component, without which there is no business.

The first few batches of monitors I have personally built have gone well, but establishing an outsourced production pipeline will be one of the investments of time required to continue growing the business. It has never been easier to produce quality hardware via this type of outsourcing than it is today, but there are still a lot of additional risks involved in managing the supply chain, ensuring regulatory compliance and managing working capital to purchase and build monitors before they are sold to customers that need to be managed in addition to the time investment of making this happen.

Based on my initial investigation of this space, there are several potential New Zealand and overseas providers I can work with which look very promising, but require long (e.g. 6-8 week) iteration cycles when things are going well, and even longer if mistakes or design failures occur along the way. The worst-case scenario is to stimulate demand that is then unable to be fulfilled promptly due to hardware issues.

My back-up plan if outsourcing production of bespoke CO2 monitors does not proceed to plan is to customise and resell an existing CO2 monitor produced by another party. This would require compromises in features and level of integration with my service and be more expensive than outsourced production, but would provide a short-term strategy to keep the business moving while the hardware pipeline is matured. Whether a manufacturer of suitable CO2 monitors would be open to this kind of white-label reselling of their product is an open question, and may be a hard sell if they perceive my business as direct competition. But if hardware issues do come up, this is the plan I expect to try first.

### Competition

Pursuing a slower, bootstrapped path raises the risk that a larger, better resourced competitor with economies of scale and the benefits of a more established brand could easily outcompete my business and win the market.

The existing New Zealand products from Air Suite, Tether and Monkeytronics as well as plenty of other potential competitors are each potential risks in this way, but as briefly discussed in the review of [existing ventilation monitoring options](#existing-ventilation-monitoring-options) there does not appear to be any focus on the small business market I want to target from these businesses. While it is inevitable that will change at some point, it is likely that this might be some time away given my assessment of their business models. If I were a venture-backed business, pursing scale to make a return for my investors, my incentive would be to focus on larger deals from a smaller number of customers where the profitability and return on effort is higher than in selling to many different small business customers.

My strategy then, is to take advantage of the current gap and opportunity to build a customer base and refine my product now, while there appears to be little competition for this small business market. If and when competition arrives, so long as I have stayed true and achieved my goal of building a business with profitable unit cost economics then any of the potential scenarios that may occur are acceptable to me. That could range from having found a product market fit that provides a competitive advantage and allows my business to keep growing even in the face of competition, to seeing all growth stop and only retaining existing customers, or any mix in between.

## Next Steps

Having spent the last several months thinking a lot about the opportunity and weighing it up against the other potential projects and businesses I could choose to work on instead, I have come to the conclusion that I do want to invest more time in the opportunity that I see to help small businesses improve their ventilation monitoring and air quality. Specifically, I am going to pursue three particular areas of work:

1. Begin sales and marketing efforts for the existing [co2mon.nz](https://co2mon.nz/) product (selling a physical monitor + ongoing monthly subscription to the web service). The aim of this is to further validate that demand for ventilation monitoring in the small business and organisation space does exist outside of the friends and family I've been selling to so far, and to start getting a broader range of feedback and input on the desired product and service functionality.

2. Develop a short-term all-inclusive rental service that targets businesses or organisations that are curious to evaluate their air quality and ventilation as a one-off activity, but are not convinced of the value of investing in ongoing monitoring, or the outright purchase of a monitor. Having this offering available provides an easy and low-risk entry point, but also keeps the door open to enable offering an ongoing monthly rental to customers, or to offer to put the initial rental cost towards the purchase of the monitor if desired.

3. Iterate and evolve the hardware design, and establish the outsourced production pipeline as discussed above.

While much of this work will be driven by me, I am planning to bring on some contracted sales and marketing expertise to help with the first two areas of work, as it's not something I have experience in, nor is that sort of activity my natural strength!

If you're excited by the potential of ventilation monitoring to help improve indoor air quality I would love to hear from you, and I'd love your help sharing the word, either by sharing this post, or a link to [co2mon.nz](https://co2mon.nz/) with your friends, family and networks.